\section*{RAG-augmented thematic grid search and meta-analysis}

To situate public interest data science within existing professional and technological lineages, a structured, explicitly normative ``grid search’’ was over a two-dimensional conceptual space. One axis comprised public interest traditions (PIT) such as journalism, law, accounting, engineering, and planning with established public mandates and institutional histories. The other axis comprised public interest technology conversations (PIC): civic tech, tech for good, critical data studies, and data justice. The resulting 5×4 matrix produced twenty PIT×PIC pairings treated as conceptual cells for systematic exploration.

The citations associated with each section in the text formed a document set on which to perform cell-wise retrieval augmented generation for all twenty combinations. For each cell, I synthesized a short narrative about shared values and practices and tensions, implications for governing data and algorithmic systems as commons, and concrete opportunities for collaboration or institutional design. These syntheses were evaluated against an explicit normative prompt: ``how compelling is this pairing as a foundation for democratic control, commons governance, and accountability of data-driven systems?'' These generative responses offer a promising (but by no means final) analytic surface promising hybrid lineages. These RAG summaries were treated as a qualitative corpus for interpretive clustering. Rather than emphasizing the mechanics of retrieval-augmented generation, the point of this exercise is conceptual: to identify recurring themes that cut across professions and technology conversations and that can organize a field-level agenda. Through iterative grouping and re-grouping, four meta-clusters emerged as especially salient for public interest data science: Evidence and Rights; Metrics and Audits; Infrastructures and Safety; Interfaces and Narratives. They do not exhaust the space, but they offer a practical scaffold.

\subsection*{Meta-cluster 1: Evidence and Rights}
This cluster frames data as evidence for upholding rights, informing policy, and advancing justice. It draws heavily from journalism and law. Investigative journalists leverage public records and disclosure laws to expose hidden harms; public interest lawyers use data to prove discrimination or disparate impact. For public interest data science, Evidence and Rights means building and defending the data infrastructures that make such work possible: access regimes for platform and administrative data, methods for documenting harms, and institutions like data clinics and data trusts that translate technical analysis into enforceable claims. Data here is not a neutral asset, but a substrate for rights-claiming and democratic oversight.

\subsection*{Meta-cluster 2: Metrics, Audits, and Institutional Accountability}
This cluster focuses on measurement and verification tools needed to hold algorithms and data-driven processes accountable. Inspired by accounting and auditing, it treats algorithmic systems as analogous to corporate balance sheets that can hide risks or fraud unless independently checked. Metrics and Audits work includes techniques to test algorithms for bias and error, fairness and accountability metrics, and regular auditing processes akin to financial audits. It also encompasses standards and documentation such as model cards, datasheets, audit frameworks that make external evaluation feasible. Institutional mandates are central: regulators or professional bodies must require and enforce such practices for them to matter.

\subsection*{Meta-cluster 3: Infrastructures, Space, and Socio-Technical Safety}
This cluster emphasizes the engineering and governance of technical infrastructure to ensure safety, reliability, and long-term public benefit. It parallels civil engineering and planning, which evolved public interest commitments after infrastructure failures and injustices. In data science, Infrastructures and Safety means treating data and AI systems as critical infrastructure that must meet standards for robustness, resilience, and risk mitigation. It includes open-source tools, public data repositories, privacy-protective sharing platforms, and archival systems, as well as stress-testing, redundancy, and contingency planning. Data systems are understood as socio-technical environments whose failures can have distributed, unequal impacts.

\subsection*{Meta-cluster 4: Interfaces, Narratives, and Data Power}
The final cluster focuses on how people encounter, interpret, and contest data systems. Drawing from journalism, HCI, and design, it recognizes that analysis has limited impact if it is not made legible and relevant. Interfaces and Narratives encompasses visualizations, dashboards, participatory tools, and stories that connect data to democratic dialogue. It includes data journalism, community mapping, interactive explainers of algorithms, and co-designed tools that help communities explore local data. The emphasis is on translation and contestation: making complex systems intelligible, highlighting stakes, and creating spaces where affected publics can use data as a shared language for debate and decision-making.